REPORT
Pushed to the Limit  
and Beyond
A year into the largest ever Ebola outbreak

|2
Content
5 Sounding the alarm
8 Global coalition of 
inaction
13 Last hope to control  
the outbreak
16 Doctors without a cure… 
but with care
20 Looking to the future
22 Map of the region
COVER PICTURE
An MSF health worker in protective clothing 
carries a child suspected of having Ebola 
in the MSF treatment centre in Monrovia, 
Liberia on 5 October 2014.
© John Moore/Getty Images
* Transit centres are short-stay centres for people to await 
blood test results. If the test comes back negative, they 
will be discharged. If positive, they will be transferred to an 
Ebola management centre.
The remaining €789,668 was spent responding in 
Mali, Nigeria and Senegal
8,351 people admitted into MSF Ebola 
management centres.
Since the start of the outbreak in West Africa, MSF has set 
up 15 Ebola management and transit* centres
In 2014, MSF spent €59,054,680 on its Ebola 
response
This year thousands of health workers have risked their lives 
to support patients and help control the Ebola outbreak, 
while facing stigma and fear in their own communities. The 
vulnerability of medical staff to Ebola is a double tragedy – the 
virus takes the lives of the very people meant to tackle it. Nearly 
500 healthcare workers have died of Ebola in Guinea, Liberia and 
Sierra Leone to date.
This report is dedicated to them and to our 14 MSF colleagues 
who have lost their lives in Guinea, Sierra Leone and Liberia 
during this epidemic. They are sorely missed and our deepest 
sympathies remain with their families and friends.

3|
3|
Introduction
We are now a year into the deadliest Ebola outbreak the world 
has ever seen, with at least 24,000 people infected and more than 
10,000 deaths. Ebola has destroyed lives and families, left deep 
scars, and ripped at the social and economic fabric of Guinea, 
Liberia and Sierra Leone. 
The virus cut a vast swathe through the 
three countries, in a cross-border geo-
graphical spread never seen before. 
Fear and panic set in, the sick and their 
families were desperate, and national 
health workers and MSF teams were 
overwhelmed and exhausted. Medical 
workers are not trained to deal with at 
least 50 percent of their patients dying 
from a disease for which no treatments 
exist.  Nevertheless, the world at first 
ignored the calls for help and then 
belatedly decided to act. Meanwhile, 
months were wasted and lives were 
lost. No one knows the true number of 
deaths the epidemic will have ultimately 
caused: the resulting collapse of health 
services means that untreated malaria, 
complicated deliveries and car crashes 
will have multiplied the direct Ebola 
deaths many times over. 
A year later, the atmosphere of fear and 
the level of misinformation still circu-
lating continue to hamper the ability 
to halt the virus. In Sierra Leone, hot-
spots persist, while in Guinea health 
workers come under violent attack due 
to ongoing mistrust and fear. Encour-
agingly, Liberia has seen the sharpest 
decline in cases, yet the country will 
remain at risk while Ebola lives on in 
neighbouring Guinea and Sierra Leone. 
A significant challenge remains ahead 
of us. To declare an end to the out-
break, we must identify every last case, 
requiring a level of meticulous preci-
sion that is practically unique in med-
ical humanitarian interventions in the 
field. There is no room for mistakes or 
complacency; the number of new cases 
weekly is still higher than in any pre-
vious outbreak. Success in reducing the 
number of cases in one location can be 
swiftly ruined by an unexpected flare-up 
in an unforeseen area. 
Many questions, few simple 
answers
A year into the outbreak, many ques-
tions abound. How did the epidemic 
spiral so spectacularly out of control? 
MSF Ebola management centre, Kailahun, 
Sierra Leone. A medical team gets ready to 
enter the high-risk zone. 
© Sylvain Cherkaoui/Cosmos

|4
Why was the world so slow to wake up to 
its severity and respond? Was it due to 
fear, lack of political will, lack of exper-
tise, or a perfect storm of all three? Did 
MSF make the right choices? How could 
MSF have done more and saved more 
lives? What have we learned from this 
outbreak and what must be done differ-
ently in future? There are many ques-
tions and few simple answers. 
MSF teams are still absorbed in tack-
ling the ongoing outbreak, and it is dif-
ficult to draw definitive conclusions 
whilst lacking the necessary distance 
for a thorough critical review. Here we 
put forward initial reflections on the 
past year, describing key moments and 
challenges from the perspective of MSF 
staff. More in-depth reviews will cer-
tainly follow. 
This paper is based on interviews with 
dozens of our staff who give a snap-
shot of the reality for MSF over the past 
year, both on the ground and in head-
quarters. We have been tested, pushed 
beyond our limits, and made our share 
of mistakes.
What also clearly emerges is that no 
one was prepared for the nightmarish 
spread and magnitude of this epi-
demic. The Ebola outbreak proved to 
be an exceptional event that exposed 
the reality of how inefficient and slow 
health and aid systems are to respond 
to emergencies. ‘Business as usual’ 
was exposed on the world stage, with 
the loss of thousands of lives. What will 
we have learned from these mistakes? 
A SADLY UNIQUE YEAR
While MSF has helped to control Ebola outbreaks in nine 
countries over the past 20 years, the epidemic that has raged in 
west Africa proved uniquely catastrophic. In the past year, MSF 
has been pushed to the limits and beyond, launching a response 
marked by many firsts for the organisation, many of them tragic 
beyond words.
The first time we:
 ∙Lost so many patients to Ebola, 
2,547 of our patients have died, a 
catastrophically high number that 
shocked MSF teams – even in most 
warzones, losing so many patients 
in such a short time is unheard of. 
 ∙Had MSF colleagues fall sick with 
Ebola, 28 of whom became infected 
and 14 tragically passed away. 
 ∙Turned Ebola patients away, as 
happened at our overwhelmed facil-
ity in Monrovia.
 ∙Responded to viral haemorrhagic 
fever on such a large scale in 
multiple countries simultaneously 
– Ebola in Guinea, Sierra Leone, 
Liberia, Nigeria, Mali, Senegal, in 
addition to an unrelated Ebola 
outbreak in Democratic Republic of 
Congo and Marburg in Uganda.
 ∙Mobilised against an Ebola 
epidemic spread over such a vast 
geographic area, and in densely 
populated urban centres. 
 ∙Diverted human resources from 
other MSF emergency projects on 
such a scale. International and 
national staff reassigned from 
headquarters and other MSF 
projects worldwide account for 213 
departures of the more than 1,300 
international staff deployed to 
respond to Ebola. 
 ∙Opened an Ebola management 
centre with 250 beds. Prior to this 
epidemic, a 40-bed centre was the 
largest we had built to respond to a 
large-scale epidemic. 
 ∙Shipped in and set up incinerators 
to cremate bodies, as happened 
in Monrovia when the national 
burial teams could not cope with the 
number of dead.
 ∙Distributed approximately 70,000 
home protection and disinfection 
kits for 600,000 people in Monrovia.
 ∙Distributed antimalarial drugs 
to more than 650,000 people in 
Monrovia and 1.8 million people in 
Freetown.
 ∙Constructed a specialised materni-
ty unit to care for pregnant women 
with Ebola.
 ∙Embarked on MSF’s largest knowl-
edge transfer effort, with more 
than 800 MSF staff trained on safe 
Ebola management in headquarters, 
as well as 250 people from other 
organisations such as the World 
Health Organization, the US Center 
for Disease Control, International 
Medical Corps, GOAL, Save the Chil-
dren, French Red Cross and others. 
Hundreds more were trained on-site 
in the affected countries. 
 ∙Began clinical trials of experimen-
tal treatments and vaccines in the 
midst of an outbreak.
 ∙Addressed UN member states at 
the UN General Assembly, as we 
did in September 2014, declaring 
that we collectively were losing the 
battle against Ebola.

‘Mysterious disease’
On 14 March 2014, Dr Esther Sterk in 
MSF’s Geneva office was informed of 
a ‘mysterious disease’ reported by the 
Ministry of Health in Guinea. Several 
health staff taking care of the sick had 
died and mortality was very high. Suspi-
cious of Lassa viral haemorrhagic fever, 
she forwarded the report describing the 
symptoms of the cases to Dr Michel Van 
Herp, MSF’s senior viral haemorrhagic 
fever epidemiologist in Brussels.
“What jumped out at me from the med-
ical report was the hiccups, a typical 
symptom associated with Ebola,” recalls 
Dr Van Herp. “After further examination, 
I said to my colleagues, ‘We’re definitely 
dealing with viral haemorrhagic fever, 
and we should be prepared for Ebola, 
even if never seen in this region before.’” 
Three MSF emergency teams were 
deployed at once, one from Geneva, the 
second from Brussels, both with rein-
forcements and supplies. The third, an 
MSF team based in Sierra Leone with 
viral haemorrhagic fever experience, 
was redirected over the border with 
some protection materials and was the 
first to arrive in Guéckédou, Guinea, on 
18 March. 
Acting on their suspicions, the team 
immediately set up the priority activities 
for an Ebola outbreak: caring for the sick 
in Guéckédou hospital, training local 
health staff on how to protect them-
selves, raising awareness of the virus in 
the community, conducting safe burials, 
and running ambulances. Dr Van Herp 
joined them shortly after to begin out-
reach activities and to investigate sus-
pected cases in the region, tracking the 
virus’s spread so as to contain it. On 21 
March, laboratory confirmation of sam-
ples sent to Europe came through late 
in the evening and on 22 March, the 
Guinean Ministry of Health officially 
declared the outbreak as Ebola. 
Unprecedented spread
The detective work of the epidemi-
ologists revealed some unconnected 
chains of transmission in different loca-
tions in the Guinée forestière region, 
many of whom had family in neigh-
bouring Liberia and Sierra Leone. 
“It was dawning on us that the spread of 
the outbreak was something we’d never 
seen before. Just days after we arrived, 
an alert came in of suspected cases over 
the border in Foya, Liberia,” says Marie-
Christine Ferir, MSF emergency coordi-
nator. “Then it went from bad to worse 
– a confirmed case showed up 650 km 
Sounding the alarm
Unprecedented, out of control: a war of words
MSF Ebola management centre, Kailahun, 
Sierra Leone. 
© Sylvain Cherkaoui/Cosmos

|6
away from Guéckédou in Guin-
ea’s capital, Conakry.”
On 31 March, MSF publicly 
declared 
the 
outbreak 
as 
‘unprecedented’ due to the geo-
graphic spread of the cases. 
What now seems obvious was, 
at the time, considered exag-
gerated and alarmist by many. 
On 1 April, the World Health 
Organization (WHO), via its chief 
spokesperson in Geneva, was 
the first to call into question 
MSF’s declaration, objecting 
that the virus dynamics were 
not unlike those of past outbreaks, nor 
was the outbreak unprecedented. 
“This was Zaire, the most deadly strain 
of Ebola, spread out in an unprepared 
region, while the sick and their care-
givers were moving on a scale we’d 
never seen before. Even the dead were 
being transported from one village to 
another,” recalls Dr Van Herp. 
“We balanced the risks of potentially 
fuelling further panic against the knowl-
edge that this epidemic would be far 
more complicated to control than any 
other before,” says Dr Van Herp. “I had 
no doubt it was unprecedented – our 
alarm bells were ringing from the start.”
Virus without borders
Ebola had been stealthily spreading 
undetected for more than three months. 
It is not unusual for Ebola to go undiag-
nosed for a substantial period of time; 
the past eight Ebola outbreaks each 
took two months on average to be dis-
covered and investigated. Ebola’s symp-
toms are easily confused with other dis-
eases, such as cholera and malaria, and 
experts trained to recognise it are rare, 
both in MSF and in the world at large.
However, past outbreaks took place 
mostly in remote villages in central 
and eastern Africa, where they were 
more easily contained. In a twist of geo-
graphic fate, Ebola erupted at the junc-
tion of Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone, 
where people regularly move across the 
porous borders. 
Fear and suspicion of the unknown virus, 
unsafe burial practices, mistrust in poli-
ticians, the hiding of cases, and a weak 
public health system, which lacked the 
resources to recognise and efficiently 
respond to Ebola, all contributed to the 
virus surging through the region. 
MSF teams spread thin
Within the first two weeks, more than 60 
MSF international staff were deployed 
to Guinea and had set up three Ebola 
management centres in Guéckédou, 
Macenta and Conakry, whilst tracing 
alerts and trying to carry out all the 
other ‘normal’ priority activities in an 
Ebola outbreak. 
“The problem initially was not so much 
the number of cases, but that the hot-
spots were spread out in so many loca-
tions,” says Dr Armand Sprecher, MSF 
public health specialist. “In the past, 
Ebola stood still for us and we could 
quickly set up operations in the same 
area to contain it. This time, people 
moved around much more and Ebola 
travelled with them. So we had to rep-
licate activities and move around our 
handful of experienced staff like chess 
pieces, trying to gauge where they’d be 
best placed to act fast.”
On 31 March, cases were confirmed in 
Liberia. One of the MSF teams in Guinea 
was redirected to set up isolation wards 
in Monrovia and Foya, and train health-
care workers on how to tackle the virus. 
Only 12 cases were reported in ten days, 
and by mid-May the situation there 
seemed under control. After 21 days 
without new cases and having trained 
health staff in Liberia, the MSF team 
departed to reinforce those in Guinea.
“Although we also began to see a 
decrease of cases in Guinée forestière 
region in May, we stayed vigilant in case 
of hidden chains of transmission,” says 
Dr Van Herp. “Ebola outbreaks 
often come in waves. You can 
see a lull in one area, only to 
see the numbers spike again 
later. Until every last contact is 
followed up, victory cannot be 
declared.” 
Meanwhile, there was concern 
all along about the puzzling 
absence of confirmed cases 
over the border in Sierra Leone.
Undiscovered outbreak in 
Sierra Leone
In mid and late March, Ebola 
cases in Guinea were discovered that 
were reportedly coming from Sierra 
Leone. MSF immediately sent these 
alerts to the Ministry of Health and 
the WHO in Freetown to be followed up 
locally.
From the onset of the epidemic, the US 
biotechnology company Metabiota and 
Tulane University, partners of Sierra 
Leone’s Kenema hospital, had the lead 
in supporting Sierra Leone’s Ministry of 
Health in investigating suspected cases. 
Their investigations came back Ebola-
negative, while their ongoing surveil-
lance activities seem to have missed 
the cases of Ebola that had emerged in 
the country.
 
“We had prioritised our resources on 
areas with confirmed cases in Guinea 
and Liberia,” says Ferir. “There was 
little room to question the formal infor-
mation coming from Freetown that the 
investigations showed no confirmed 
cases in Sierra Leone.”
Then, on 26 May, the first confirmed 
case was declared in Sierra Leone and 
the Ministry of Health called on MSF to 
intervene. MSF’s priority became set-
ting up an Ebola management centre in 
Kailahun, the epicentre at that time in 
Sierra Leone. With MSF’s teams already 
spread thin, and due to the high number 
of cases, MSF lacked the capacity to 
simultaneously manage essential out-
reach activities such as awareness 
raising and surveillance. 
“When we set up operations in Kailahun, 
we realised we were already too late. 
There were cases everywhere, and we 
built the centre with 60 beds, rather 
than the 20 we started with in Guinea,” 
Guinea, March 31. 
© Amandine Colin/MSF

7|
says Anja Wolz, MSF emergency coor-
dinator. “The Ministry of Health and the 
partners of Kenema hospital refused to 
share data or lists of contacts with us, 
so we were working in the dark while 
cases just kept coming in.”
After a short period of raised hopes in 
May as cases appeared to be declining in 
Guinea and Liberia, the hidden outbreak 
in Sierra Leone mushroomed and reig-
nited the outbreak for its neighbours. 
Today, describing the epidemic as 
‘unprecedented’ is stating the obvious, 
though for months MSF felt alone in 
this analysis. But MSF was not pre-
pared for just how unprecedented the 
outbreak would become, both in terms 
of its scale and in terms of the leading 
role the organisation would be forced to 
assume.  
Out of control 
In late June, MSF teams counted that the 
virus was actively transmitting in more 
than 60 locations in Guinea, Liberia 
and Sierra Leone. Facing an exception-
ally aggressive epidemic and unable 
to do everything, MSF teams focused 
on damage control and prioritised the 
majority of resources on running Ebola 
management centres. Critically it was 
not possible to roll out the full range of 
containment activities in all locations. 
Across the three countries, local health-
care workers were tragically dying by 
the dozens. In Ebola outbreaks, health 
facilities without proper infection con-
trol often act as multiplying chambers 
for the virus, and become dangerous 
places for both health workers and 
patients. This outbreak was no different, 
but it happened on a massive scale.
“We raised the alarm publicly again on 
21 June, declaring that the epidemic 
was out of control and that we could 
not respond to the large number of new 
cases and locations alone,” recalls Dr 
Bart Janssens, MSF director of oper-
ations. “We called for qualified med-
ical staff to be deployed, for trainings 
to be organised, and for contact tracing 
and awareness-raising activities to 
be stepped up. But effectively none of 
these things followed our appeal for 
help. It was like shouting into a desert.” 
Although the writing was on the wall, 
again MSF was accused of alarmism 
THE SIX KEY ACTIVITIES TO BRING AN EBOLA 
OUTBREAK UNDER CONTROL
1. Isolation and care for patients: Isolate patients in Ebola management 
centres staffed by trained personnel and provide supportive medical care 
and psychosocial support for patients and their families.
2. Safe burials: Provide and encourage safe burial activities in the 
communities
3. Awareness-raising: Conduct extensive awareness-raising activities to help 
communities understand the nature of the disease, how to protect them-
selves, and how to help stem its spread. This works best when efforts are 
made to understand the culture and traditions of local communities. 
4. Disease surveillance: Conduct and promote thorough disease surveillance 
in order to locate new cases, track likely pathways of transmission, and 
identify sites that require thorough disinfection.
5. Contact-tracing: Conduct and promote thorough tracing of those who have 
been in contact with Ebola-infected people. If contacts are not mapped 
and followed up, it undermines all the other activities and the disease will 
continue to spread. 
6. Non-Ebola healthcare: Ensure that medical care remains available for 
people with illnesses and conditions other than Ebola (malaria, chronic 
diseases, obstetric care, etc). This includes implementing stringent policies 
to protect health facilities and health workers, particularly in areas where 
they might come into contact with patients. 
for declaring that the epidemic was out 
of control. At the same time, govern-
ment authorities and members of the 
WHO in Guinea and Sierra Leone down-
played the epidemic’s spread, insisting 
it was under control and accusing MSF 
of causing unnecessary panic. 
“In the end, we did not know what words 
to use that would make the world wake 
up and realise how out of control the 
outbreak had truly become,” recalls Dr 
Janssens. 
Gbando, Guinea. MSF epidemiologist Dr Michel Van Herp explains what is Ebola, how to 
protect yourself and avoid transmission.
© Joffrey Monnier/MSF

|8
Reluctance and obstructions
The governments of Guinea and Sierra 
Leone were initially very reluctant to 
recognise the severity of the outbreak, 
which obstructed the early response. 
This is far from unusual in outbreaks 
of Ebola – or indeed other dangerous 
infectious diseases; there is often little 
appetite to immediately sound the 
alarm for fear of causing public panic, 
disrupting the functioning of the country 
and driving away visitors and investors.
On 10 May, Guinean media reported the 
president of Guinea complaining that 
MSF was spreading panic in order to 
raise funds. In Sierra Leone, the gov-
ernment instructed the WHO to report 
only laboratory-confirmed deaths in 
June, reducing the death toll count in 
the country by excluding probable and 
suspected cases. Needless obstacles 
made responding more difficult for MSF 
teams, who were refused access to con-
tact lists and had to start from scratch 
in determining which villages were 
affected and where and how to respond. 
Faced with an explosion of Ebola cases 
in the summer, the Liberian authorities 
were transparent about the spread of 
cases, though few outside the country 
stepped forward to respond to their 
urgent requests for help. The govern-
ment was wrongly accused of scare-
mongering by its own population, who 
thought it might be a ploy to raise inter-
national assistance.
A vacuum of leadership
The WHO plays a leading role in pro-
tecting international public health, and 
it is well known that its expertise lies in 
its normative work and technical advice 
to countries worldwide. Its ability to 
respond to emergencies and outbreaks 
is less robust, lacking the human 
resources and emergency prepared-
ness to hit the ground running and care 
for patients. 
“When it became clear early on that it 
was not simply the number of cases 
that was creating concern, but indeed 
the epidemic’s spread, clear direction 
was needed and leadership should have 
been taken,” says Christopher Stokes, 
MSF general director. “The WHO should 
have been fighting the virus, not MSF.”  
There was little sharing of informa-
tion between countries, with officials 
relying on the WHO to act as liaison 
between them. It was not until July 
that new leadership was brought into 
the WHO country offices and a regional 
Global coalition of inaction
Lack of political will, expertise or simply fear?
MSF Ebola management centre, Freetown, 
Sierra Leone. 
© Yann Libessart/MSF

9|
operations centre was established in 
Conakry to oversee technical and oper-
ational support to the affected countries. 
Instead of limiting its role to providing 
advisory support to the national author-
ities for months, the WHO should have 
recognised much earlier that this out-
break required more hands-on deploy-
ment. All the elements that led to the 
outbreak’s resurgence in June were 
also present in March, but the analysis, 
recognition and willingness to assume 
responsibility to respond robustly were 
not. 
Lack of expertise, short of staff
Given that Ebola outbreaks in the past 
occurred on a much smaller scale, the 
number of people with experience of the 
disease was limited; there were simply 
not enough experts worldwide to stem 
the tide of this epidemic.  
For MSF, the most significant limita-
tion was the lack of experienced staff to 
deal with an outbreak on this scale. The 
Ebola ‘veterans’ in MSF numbered only 
around 40 at the onset of the outbreak. 
They had to simultaneously set up and 
run operations on the frontline, as well 
as coach inexperienced staff. Now more 
than 1,300 international staff and more 
than 4,000 national staff have been 
deployed over the past year.
The WHO is internationally mandated to 
lead on global health emergencies and 
possesses the know-how to bring Ebola 
under control, as does the US Centers 
for Disease Control (CDC) with its lab-
oratory and epidemiological exper-
tise. However, both WHO in the African 
Region (WHO AFRO) and its Geneva 
headquarters did not identify early on 
the need for more staff to do the hands-
on work, nor did it mobilise additional 
human resources and invest early 
enough in training more personnel. 
“We mobilised all our haemorrhagic 
fever experts and experienced med-
ical and logistical staff, many of whom 
returned multiple times to the region. 
But we couldn’t be everywhere at once, 
nor should it be our role to single-hand-
edly respond,” says Brice de le Vingne, 
MSF director of operations. “MSF does 
not have an Ebola army with a ware-
house of personnel on standby. We rely 
on the availability and commitment of 
our volunteers.”
Meanwhile, exhausted national health 
workers bravely and tirelessly stepped 
up and continued to tackle the out-
break each day, while facing stigma and 
fear in their own communities. Some 
MSF locally-hired staff were aban-
doned by their partners, ejected from 
their homes, their children ostracised 
by playmates. Their dedication and 
extraordinary hard work over the past 
year is parallel to none. 
Liberia: SOS call in June
At the end of June, there was a meeting 
in Geneva of the WHO’s Global Alert and 
Outbreak Response Network (GOARN), 
a key platform that pools technical and 
human resources in response to dis-
ease outbreaks. At the meeting, MSF 
insisted on the urgent need to deploy 
an effective response in the region and 
made a dramatic call for extra support 
to be sent to Liberia.
“I finished my presentation at the 
GOARN meeting by saying that I was 
receiving nearly daily phone calls from 
the Ministry of Health in Liberia asking 
for support, and that MSF had no 
more experienced staff I could send to 
them,” recalls Marie-Christine Ferir. “I 
remember emphasising that we had the 
chance to halt the epidemic in Liberia if 
help was sent now. It was early in the 
outbreak and there was still time. The 
call for help was heard but no action 
was taken.”
While coordination was officially organ-
ised following the GOARN meeting and 
the regional meeting in Accra in early 
July, there was a clear lack of leader-
ship from the WHO: decisions on setting 
priorities, attributing roles and respon-
sibilities, ensuring accountability for the 
quality of activities, and mobilising the 
resources necessary were not taken on 
the necessary scale. 
“Meetings happened. Action didn’t,” 
says Ferir. 
Catastrophe in Liberia
In late June, MSF emergency coordi-
nator Lindis Hurum arrived in Mon-
rovia, Liberia. With few experienced 
staff left to deploy, her small team of 
three was sent to support the Ministry 
of Health with technical advice in con-
tact tracing and water and sanitation. 
They assisted in setting up a 40-bed 
centre to be run by the US relief group 
Samaritan’s Purse, and began providing 
coordination support to the Ministry of 
Health. As the virus began spreading 
like wildfire in the capital city, the centre 
quickly became overwhelmed with sick 
patients.  
Then, at the end of July, two Samari-
tan’s Purse staff, US nationals, became 
infected with Ebola, and the organi-
sation suspended operations in the 
only two Ebola management centres 
in Liberia – in Monrovia and in Foya, in 
the northwest of the country. No one 
stepped forward to take their place to 
support the Ministry of Health in caring 
for patients. 
MSF Ebola management centre, Guéckédou, 
Guinea.
© Julien Rey/MSF

|10
Painful discussions ensued in MSF. We 
felt that we were already operating at 
100 percent, with our teams already 
overstretched in Guinea and Sierra 
Leone, and there was a concern that 
taking over the centres in Liberia would 
push MSF over the limit. What if mis-
takes were made, staff became infected 
and the project collapsed? This had 
been the case in July in the Ministry 
of Health hospital in Kenema, Sierra 
Leone, as well as for Samaritan’s Purse 
in Liberia. What if pushing the limits 
broke MSF’s ability to respond, with no 
visible replacement?
“In a way the decision was made for us 
– we couldn’t let Monrovia sink further 
into hell,” recalls Brice de le Vingne. 
“We would have to push beyond our 
threshold of risk, and we would have to 
send coordinators without experience 
in Ebola, with only two days of inten-
sive training. It would be dangerous, but 
we’d have to find a way to intervene in 
Monrovia and Foya.”
Trainings began in earnest in Brus-
sels headquarters and in the field, 
embarking on the most extensive 
knowledge-transfer exercise in MSF’s 
history, with more than 1,000 people 
trained. At the same time, an MSF team 
deployed to Foya, while construction 
began of MSF’s ELWA 3 centre in Mon-
rovia, eventually reaching 250 beds. 
“Even though ELWA 3 was the big-
gest treatment centre in history, we 
knew it was not enough,” recalls Rosa 
Crestani, MSF Ebola task force coor-
dinator. “We were desperate because 
we knew that we couldn’t do more, and 
we knew exactly what those limitations 
meant. It meant there would be dead 
bodies in homes and lying in the street. 
It meant sick people unable to get a bed, 
spreading the virus to their loved ones.” 
ELWA 3 forced to close its gate 
23.5 hours a day
By the end of August, ELWA 3 could only 
be opened for 30 minutes each morning. 
Only a few patients could be admitted to 
fill beds made empty by those who had 
died overnight. People were dying on 
the gravel outside the gates. One father 
brought his daughter in the boot of his 
car, begging MSF to take her in so as to 
not infect his other children at home. He 
was turned away. 
“We had to make the horrendous deci-
sion of who we could let into the centre,” 
says Rosa Crestani. “We had two choices 
– let those in who were earlier in the dis-
ease, or take in those were who dying 
and the most infectious. We went for a 
balance. We would take in the most we 
safely could and the sickest. But we kept 
our limits too –we refused to put more 
than one person in each bed. We could 
only offer very basic palliative care and 
there were so many patients and so few 
staff that the staff had on average only 
Monrovia, Liberia. Construction teams building what would become ELWA 3, the world’s 
largest Ebola management centre with 250 beds.
I think it’s fair to say 
that we are Doctors 
Without Borders, 
but we are not without limits. 
And we’ve reached our limit. 
It’s very frustrating, because 
I see the huge needs but I 
simply don’t have the human 
resources. We have the money 
thanks to our donors. We have 
the will. We certainly have the 
motivation, but I don’t have 
enough people to deal with 
this.”
Lindis Hurum
MSF Emergency Coordinator in Monrovia
August 2014
© Caitlin Ryan/MSF

11|
one minute per patient. It was an inde-
scribable horror.” 
The turning point – Ebola crosses 
the ocean
On 8 August, the WHO at last declared 
the outbreak a “public health emer-
gency of international concern,” a pro-
cedure that flipped the switch to unlock 
funding and activate expert capability 
faster. By this time, more than 1,000 
people had already died. What finally 
triggered the change to emergency 
response mode?
At the end of July, a US doctor working 
for Samaritan’s Purse tested positive 
for Ebola and was evacuated back to 
the US for medical care. Thereafter, the 
first case of Ebola was diagnosed out-
side west Africa; the patient, who had 
recently returned from west Africa, was 
treated at a hospital in Dallas, US. Then 
a Spanish nurse who treated a Spanish 
citizen infected with Ebola tested posi-
tive for the virus, becoming the first 
instance of human-to-human transmis-
sion of Ebola outside Africa. 
“The lack of international political will 
was no longer an option when the real-
isation dawned that Ebola could cross 
the ocean,” says Dr Joanne Liu, MSF 
international president. “When Ebola 
became an international security threat, 
and no longer a humanitarian crisis 
affecting a handful of poor countries in 
west Africa, finally the world began to 
wake up.” 
Fear factor & global paralysis
International recognition of the severity 
of the outbreak finally hit home in 
August, but an increased response was 
still slow to get off the ground. Was it 
fear of the virus that delayed the quick 
response that was so desperately 
needed? 
It is true that Ebola provokes an under-
standable and almost universal fear 
that is unequalled by any other disease. 
The lack of effective treatment, the 
painful and distressing symptoms and 
the high mortality rate cause extreme 
public anxiety, not only in the commu-
nities affected, but also among health-
care workers themselves, who are often 
among the first to fall ill, further dis-
couraging additional volunteers from 
coming forward to help. 
Natural disasters like floods and 
earthquakes usually prompt a gen-
erous outpouring of resources and 
direct intervention from aid organisa-
tions and concerned states, but fear of 
the unknown and lack of expertise in 
Ebola paralysed most aid agencies and 
donors. The margin of error required to 
safely run an Ebola management centre 
is so slim that meticulous training is 
necessary to prepare for the challenge. 
Monrovia, Liberia. An MSF medical team speaking with the sick queuing outside the gates 
of ELWA 3 management centre.  The team is assessing who can be admitted to the triage for 
possible admission to the centre. 
I’m horrified by the 
scale of the centre 
we’re constructing 
and the horrible 
conditions inside, what people 
are enduring. It’s horrible 
what our staff are having to 
do, with the risk and the heat. 
We’re struggling to deal with 
the number of patients. We’re 
trying to adapt and build 
as the need increases, but 
we’re not keeping up. We feel 
tremendous guilt and shame 
that we can’t adequately 
address the needs of the 
people.”
Brett Adamson
MSF field coordinator in Monrovia
August 2014
© Caitlin Ryan/MSF

|12
EBOLA CROSSES TO NIGERIA, SENEGAL AND MALI
Quick responses avert disaster
Concerns of an even wider regional outbreak were well founded. 
When Ebola entered Nigeria, Senegal and Mali, MSF supported 
their governments in containing the disease. With the epidemic 
already raging in neighbouring countries, all three governments 
were alert to its potential spread, which helped ensure an 
effective response. 
“As our teams were overstretched in 
the three most affected countries, 
we focused on providing technical 
support, with the level of direct MSF 
management varying according to the 
local capacity that already existed,” 
says Teresa Sancristoval, MSF emer-
gency coordinator. A similar strategy 
had been planned for Monrovia before 
the epidemic spiralled out of control.
Nigeria
19 confirmed cases, 1 suspected case, 
8 deaths
In late July, Ebola first arrived in 
Nigeria via an air passenger from 
Liberia. Despite the virus enter-
ing Lagos, a city of 20 million people, 
and Port Harcourt, with one million 
inhabitants, overall just 20 people 
were affected. The government’s fast 
response, including deploying signifi-
cant human and financial resources 
and implementing rigorous infec-
tion control measures, was critical in 
avoiding a widespread epidemic.
Senegal
1 confirmed case, 0 deaths
MSF conducted an Ebola training in 
April 2014 at the request of the Sen-
egalese government. The trained 
teams then took care of the Ebola 
case that arrived in Dakar in August. 
An MSF team of x advisors sup-
ported the Ministry of Health to set 
up an Ebola centre and train the staff 
in case management, contact trac-
ing and social mobilisation. Within a 
week, 100 percent of the contacts had 
been traced. Nine regions considered 
most at risk were also trained in out-
break response.
Mali
8 cases, 6 deaths
The first case in Mali, a two-year-old 
girl, appeared on 23 October. MSF 
sent a team to help construct an 
Ebola management centre in Bamako 
and in the town of Kayes where the 
child had died, as well training local 
staff in case management, surveil-
lance and social mobilisation. MSF 
went on to take a more hands-on 
approach than in the other two coun-
tries, including managing the two 
centres in Bamako and Kayes and 
carrying out safe burials and sur-
veillance. This was due to Mali’s less 
robust health system and a lack of 
sufficient resources to manage the 
outbreak, as well as less support 
from other partners. 
Nigeria, Senegal and Mali all had the 
benefit of world-class laboratories 
which could produce fast test results. 
The experience in all three countries 
highlights the importance of strong 
surveillance and rapid response at 
the beginning of an outbreak. 
“We tried to stress that not all of the 
response involves ‘space suits.’ Con-
tact tracing, health promotion and dis-
tribution of soap, chlorine and buckets 
were all urgently needed,” says Dr 
Jean-Clément Cabrol, MSF director of 
operations. “Not all activities are con-
fined to the high-risk zone, but every-
thing needed to be done by someone – 
and on a massive scale.” However, most 
aid organisations were very reluctant to 
take on the perceived risk of working 
with Ebola, fearing that they would not 
be able to protect their staff.
MSF was also not immune. Over the 
years, MSF’s experience with Ebola had 
been largely centralised within a group 
of experts and it was considered a spe-
cialism. Among the parts of MSF with 
little or no experience of Ebola, there 
was some initial reluctance to intervene 
immediately. MSF should have been 
faster at mobilising the full capacity 
of the organisation to respond to the 
outbreak. 
By late August, the virus had exploded 
across the three countries. After dis-
cussions with other aid agencies, it was 
calculated that it would take a minimum 
of two to three months for them to train 
and be ready to deploy. Meanwhile the 
clock was ticking and Ebola was win-
ning. Funding was no longer the main 
problem and untrained voluntary help 
would clearly not be enough. Skilled 
and well-equipped medical teams were 
needed on the ground immediately. 
“We were in uncharted waters and could 
not wait the two months necessary 
for other aid agencies to train up and 
respond,” says Dr Liu. “Who else could 
step into the breach immediately before 
the epidemic spiralled further out of 
control?” 

13|
On 2 September, Dr Joanne Liu, MSF’s 
international president, made a fervent 
appeal to the UN member states in New 
York. In her speech, she pleaded:  
“Many of the member states here today 
have invested heavily in chemical 
and biological response. To curb the 
epidemic, it is imperative that states 
immediately deploy civilian and mili-
tary assets with expertise in biohaz-
ard containment. I call upon you to 
dispatch your disaster response teams, 
backed by the full weight of your logis-
tical capabilities.
We cannot cut off the affected coun-
tries and hope this epidemic will sim-
ply burn out. To put out this fire, we 
must run into the burning building.”
This was a very unusual call for MSF, 
known for keeping a safe distance from 
military and security agendas to pro-
tect its independence in conflict zones. 
However, the catastrophe unfolding on 
the ground could clearly not be brought 
under control by international aid 
organisations alone – a desperate call 
of last resort had to be made. 
“We considered that the only organisa-
tions in the world that might have the 
means to fill the gap immediately might 
be military units with some level of bio-
logical warfare expertise,” says Christo-
pher Stokes. “Faced with continuing to 
turn away patients at the hospital gate 
while waiting for other volunteers to 
train up and deploy, or calling for help 
from military agencies, the choice was 
clear.”
After having sought agreement with the 
heads of state of Liberia, Sierra Leone, 
and Guinea, MSF called for field hospi-
tals with isolation wards to be scaled up, 
trained personnel to be sent out, mobile 
laboratories to be deployed to improve 
diagnostics, and air bridges established 
to move people and material to and 
within west Africa.
Last hope to control  
the outbreak
MSF calls on the UN Member States to deploy civilian and military 
biohazard assets 
MSF Ebola management centre, Monrovia, 
Liberia.
© Caroline Van Nespen/MSF

|14
A risky call 
MSF insisted that any military assets 
and personnel deployed should not 
be used for quarantine, containment 
or crowd control measures, because 
forced quarantines have been shown to 
breed fear and unrest, rather than stem 
the spread of Ebola.
“Whilst social unrest and fears of state 
collapse ran rampant, we feared that our 
call would be misconstrued or inten-
tionally twisted into a call for armed 
stabilisation,” says Stokes. “What if mil-
itaries deployed and proved more dam-
aging than helpful? Then we would be 
held responsible for having called them 
in the first place.” 
MSF also ran the risk of confirming sus-
picions, levelled at all aid organisations, 
of being part of a security or political 
agenda. This suspicion in armed conflict 
could put both aid workers and patients 
in the firing line of opposing forces.
Help belatedly arrives but not 
exactly what was asked for
Helpful pledges of equipment and logis-
tical support came in September, yet 
sufficient deployment of qualified and 
trained medical staff to treat patients 
on the ground did not. Much to MSF’s 
disappointment, the majority of the 
military effort deployed in October and 
November was limited to support, coor-
dination and logistics for the efforts 
of international aid organisations and 
local authorities.
Although very much needed, the med-
ical facilities built to treat local and for-
eign healthcare workers were provided 
to help ensure that others could treat 
patients, rather than offering direct care 
themselves to the wider community. 
“We insisted that simply constructing 
the physical structures would not be 
enough, and that transferring the 
risk to inexperienced aid workers and 
exhausted local health workers was 
unacceptable,” says Dr Liu. “There was 
a clear reluctance to jump in and care 
for patients. They wanted to help, but 
not to do anything risky – US helicopters 
would not even transport laboratory 
samples or healthy personnel returning 
from treating patients.”  
Although the appeal for the deployment 
of biohazard teams was not met, the 
assistance that did arrive was welcome. 
This engagement marked the symbolic 
beginning of a substantial interna-
tional response, and served to reassure 
people that help was finally underway.  
Providing intensive treatment facili-
ties for healthcare workers also reas-
sured international aid agencies, who 
then felt able to offer stronger assur-
ance before deploying their staff, as 
well as bolstering local health workers 
and authorities. Meanwhile some posi-
tive signs were coming from Lofa county 
in northwest Liberia. By late October, no 
new patients were being reported at 
MSF’s centre in Foya.  Other organisa-
tions came on board to take over the 
remaining activities and surveillance, 
allowing MSF teams to withdraw from 
Lofa county and redirect their efforts to 
areas with unmet needs.
“The comprehensive efforts and strong 
collaboration with the community cer-
tainly played a crucial role in reducing 
the number of cases in Lofa county,” 
says Dorian Job, MSF deputy emer-
gency manager. “This was one of the 
first moments we felt that the epidemic 
could be controlled.” 
Monrovia, Liberia. MSF team leader Jackson 
K. P. Naimah, who addressed the UN 
Security Council in September, discussing 
with Dr Joanne Liu, MSF’s international 
president. 
BRIEFING THE UN SECURITY COUNCIL
Following the speech of MSF international president Dr Joanne Liu at the 
UN General Assembly in New York, Liberian MSF team leader Jackson K.P. 
Naimah followed suit, speaking via videoconference at the UN Security Council 
on 18 September:
“Right now, as I speak, people are sitting at the gates of our centres, literally 
begging for their lives. They rightly feel alone, neglected, denied – left to die a 
horrible, undignified death. We are failing the sick because there is not enough 
help on the ground.”
The UN Security Council ruled that the Ebola outbreak constituted a threat to 
international peace and security and unanimously passed a resolution urging 
UN member states to provide more resources to fight the outbreak. 
Thereafter, taking stock of the inability of the WHO to provide the necessary 
leadership and coordination to combat the Ebola outbreak between April and 
September, UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon established the creation of the 
first ever UN health mission, the UN Mission for Ebola Emergency Response 
(UNMEER).
© Fernando Calero/MSF

15|
Cases decline 
Late in 2014, by the time that the mili-
taries were building new Ebola manage-
ment centres, cases began to decline in 
other regions too. The reason behind 
the drop in cases is difficult to attribute 
to any single factor. Public behaviour 
changes, greater availability of beds, 
increased efforts to control infection 
and more safe burials have all contrib-
uted to the decrease.
MSF Ebola management centre, Conakry, 
Guinea. Each night all the waste from the 
high-risk zone that cannot be chlorinated 
must be burnt on site.
“From the very outset, this epidemic 
has been defined by its unpredictability, 
reach and speed,” says Karline Kleijer, 
MSF emergency coordinator. “If the epi-
demic had not started to recede, the 
Ebola management centres built in the 
region would have been indispensable.” 
In December, the international response 
was striving to deliver what had been 
promised three months before. By the 
time they deployed, it was difficult to 
adapt and adjust to the rapidly changing 
epidemiology of the outbreak, resulting 
in resources allocated to some activities 
that were no longer the priority. 
 
© Julien Rey/MSF

|16
A virus that kills more than half your 
patients, with no available treat-
ment to fight it, is a doctor’s worst 
nightmare. 
Still, more than 2,300 patients have 
emerged Ebola-free in MSF’s centres in 
Liberia, Guinea and Sierra Leone. Each 
one is celebrated as a victory.
“We try to provide the best supportive 
care we can, as well as alleviate our 
patients’ symptoms and suffering,” says 
Dr Armand Sprecher. “Our experience 
from past outbreaks demonstrates that 
good clinical care can reduce overall 
case fatality rates by between 10 and 15 
percent. There are still many unknowns, 
both medically and epidemiologically, 
about Ebola and how to best combat it 
clinically.”
Several elements may impact mortality: 
the severity of infection at admission 
(viral load), the age of the patient, gen-
eral previous health status, coexisting 
infections, nutritional status, intensive 
supportive care, or a combination of all 
of these.  
MSF is documenting and researching 
our data to examine these factors, 
which will be shared with the research 
community. So far, the main results 
suggest that the age of the patient 
(before 5 years old and after 40 years 
old), and viral load (high levels of virus 
in the blood on admission), are factors 
that appear to determine the highest 
mortality rates.
Laboratory constraints 
One of the key constraints for MSF med-
ical teams in delivering more individual-
ised patient care was the limitations in 
monitoring their biochemistry.  
“Some patients are seemingly on the 
mend, walking, talking and eating, then 
sadly and inexplicably pass away an 
hour later. It is not yet known which fac-
tors allow some people to recover while 
others succumb,” says Dr Sprecher. “To 
try to understand how aggressively the 
virus is attacking the body, monitoring 
Doctors without a cure… 
but with care
The medical challenges of Ebola
MSF Ebola management centre,  
Guéckédou, Guinea. 
© Sylvain Cherkaoui/Cosmos

17|
patients’ electrolytes and analysing 
their blood chemistry helps define the 
best care you can provide.” 
Doing this requires advanced laboratory 
support capacity, which was not always 
available, either within MSF or through 
external partners, particularly in the 
first months of the outbreak. The lab-
oratory capacity provided by key part-
ners who came on board early in the 
epidemic was overwhelmed with the 
high numbers of cases that needed to 
be diagnosed, while some were unpre-
pared to run biochemistry tests. 
As early as April, MSF teams in Guinea 
were using ISTAT machines for elec-
trolyte monitoring. However, practical 
challenges as well as competing priori-
ties meant that it was not until October 
that they were reinstated in MSF’s 
centres. 
Working in the hot zone
In the eight-piece ‘space suits’ worn by 
MSF medical teams on the ground tem-
peratures can reach 46 degrees Celsius. 
One of the most dangerous moments is 
removing the soiled suit, a meticulous 
12-step process that is frustratingly 
complex, can take up to 20 minutes, and 
is repeated at least three times per day. 
“We have to move and breathe slowly 
due to the overpowering heat, limiting 
us to spending an hour maximum inside 
at a time,” says Dr Hilde De Clerck. 
“Inside the high-risk zone, I have to plan 
the most crucial activities I can squeeze 
into that hour. It’s frustrating and upset-
ting that that I can’t spend unlimited 
time with my patients or connect with 
them as I usually would, with a smile or 
a comforting human touch.” 
On a knife-edge
In an Ebola outbreak, MSF teams work 
on a knife-edge addressing both patient 
care and staff safety. 
MSF had called for help as the epidemic 
sped out of control because, at the most 
severe periods of the outbreak, teams 
were unable to admit more patients or 
provide the best possible care. This was 
extremely painful for an organisation 
of volunteer medics, leading to heated 
exchanges and tensions within MSF. 
“Our duty of care for our staff is certainly 
crucial, as in any MSF project world-
wide,” says Henry Gray, MSF emergency 
coordinator. “Though we have invested 
heavily in personal protective equip-
ment, training and security protocols, 
we have painfully learned there is never 
zero risk.”
“We were also under pressure to set 
an example and show that it was pos-
sible to treat Ebola safely, in an effort 
to mobilise others to intervene,” says 
Brice de le Vingne. “If we took even 
more risks and too many staff fell ill, 
we’d be unable to maintain trust with 
our teams or recruit new volunteers, 
We are all scared of 
Ebola, and rightfully 
so. It’s something 
about the way it is emitted – 
through the blood, sweat and 
tears of human beings. Imagine 
being the patient: you’re sick 
and scared, your doctor is 
fearful, and when he comes 
to you he’s unrecognisable in 
a space suit. And what are my 
tools to heal my patient? A bed, 
three meals, fluids, tablets, 
antimalarials, painkillers.  
I do my best to make sure your 
immune system is able to fight 
Ebola as best it can. But in the 
end I’m physically isolated from 
my patients and, when I get to 
them, I can only say you have 
around 50 percent chance of 
dying and I can do very little 
about it for you.” 
Dr Javid Abdelmoneim
MSF doctor in Sierra Leone
September-October 2014
MSF Ebola management centre,  
Guéckédou, Guinea. MSF nurse in the 
undressing area after exiting the high-risk 
zone. 
© Sylvain Cherkaoui/Cosmos

|18
resulting in the possible collapse of our 
centres with no one to take our place.” 
As the number of cases grew, MSF staff 
were challenged by having increasingly 
limited time with each patient. At cer-
tain times, admissions were so high that 
there were not enough staff to safely 
manage intravenous hydration, as was 
the case in Monrovia in September. It 
was not just a matter of insert a drip 
safely, but also of having enough team 
members to carry out the necessary 
monitoring, follow-up of fluid hydration 
for patients and good infection control.
When a member of staff became 
infected, fear had an impact, and some-
times led to more restrictive care imme-
diately afterwards. MSF teams strived 
to quickly overcome these barriers and 
to return to optimal levels of individual-
ised care with the minimum of delay.
Imperfect offerings
In September, when there were not 
enough beds in the centres in Monrovia, 
MSF began distributing family protec-
tion and home disinfection kits for more 
than 600,000 people in the city. The kits 
were designed to give people some pro-
tection should a family member become 
ill, as well as allowing people to disin-
fect their homes to reduce infection 
risk. One of the key targets was health 
workers, who were often asked to help 
care for people in their communities 
when treatment centres were full.
“Though we knew these kits were not the 
solution to the Ebola crisis in Monrovia, 
we were forced to take unprecedented 
and imperfect measures,” recalls Anna 
Halford, MSF coordinator for the distri-
bution. “They were a stopgap solution 
to allow people to try and protect them-
selves from a sick family member for a 
short time until they could be admitted 
to a management centre.”
Doctors without a cure
When the outbreak began, there was no 
vaccine, drug or rapid diagnostic test on 
the market proven to be safe and effec-
tive against Ebola in humans.
Ebola had never been considered a pri-
ority for big pharmaceutical companies, 
as it was perceived as affecting only a 
limited number of economically dis-
advantaged patients in short-lived and 
remote outbreaks in Africa.
Most of the research had been con-
ducted by public institutes and small 
firms, supported by public defence 
funding, and justified by the bioter-
rorist risk posed by the highly infectious 
viral disease. The majority of research 
and development was dedicated to vac-
cines and post-exposure prophylaxis, 
with a focus on stockpiling products for 
Western markets.  
But as the epidemic spiralled fur-
ther out of control and repeated calls 
for help were slow to materialise, MSF 
became increasingly aware that accel-
erated product development was ever 
more urgently needed for the response. 
“Research 
and 
development 
finally 
accelerated in early August, when the 
WHO confirmed that using Ebola prod-
ucts not yet tested on humans was eth-
ical and even encouraged, given the 
exceptional nature of the outbreak,” 
says Julien Potet, policy advisor for MSF 
Access Campaign. “Public and private 
research sectors fast-forwarded the 
process to start clinical trials from what 
usually takes years to mere months.” 
In August, MSF made the first-time 
decision to partner with research insti-
tutions, the WHO, Ministries of Health 
and pharmaceutical companies to trial 
experimental treatments and vaccines 
in the midst of the outbreak. The first 
Ebola experimental treatment trial in 
west Africa, for the drug favipiravir, 
began at MSF’s centre in Guéckédou, 
Guinea on 17 December 2014. 
“Starting clinical trials in a matter of 
months in the midst of a complex 
humanitarian crisis has never hap-
pened before, much less in risky bio-
hazard conditions,” says Dr Micaela 
Serafini, MSF medical director.
The trial protocols were designed to 
ensure that disruption to patient care 
would be minimal, that internationally-
accepted medical and research eth-
ical standards were respected, and that 
sound scientific data would be produced 
and shared for the public good.
Will these ongoing efforts be the final 
game-changer in the current epidemic? 
“Possibly not, as the notably lower 
number of cases may outpace the con-
clusive results of the studies. The virus 
may just escape the snare of an effec-
tive vaccine and treatment this time 
around,” says Dr Bertrand Draguez, 
MSF medical director. “But the ongoing 
studies are certainly not for nothing. 
Now, with the data collected from the 
trials, the momentum must be sus-
tained to ensure that drugs, vaccines 
and diagnostics are ready and acces-
sible for the next epidemic.” 
To that end, it is essential that there is 
a real commitment from regulatory 
bodies, pharmaceutical companies and 
governments for fair access to vac-
cines and treatments in Ebola-affected 
countries. The expertise, research and 
results must be shared collectively. 
Had an effective treatment or vaccine 
existed, thousands of deaths could have 
been avoided. 
 
Guéckédou, Guinea. MSF nurse handling 
favipiravir tablets, at the MSF Ebola ma-
nagement centre where clinical trials of the 
treatment began on 17 December 2014.
© Peter Casaer/MSF

19|
19|
MSF INTERNAL CHALLENGES
This Ebola outbreak presented MSF with substantial internal challenges, many of which require 
further deliberation. Whilst others have lauded us for our response to the outbreak, we are very 
conscious too of where we fell short. This includes, but is not limited to:
 ∙A year of competing crises. 2014 
was a very demanding year for MSF, 
as for other frontline humanitarian 
organisations. Simultaneous crises 
in Central African Republic, South 
Sudan, Ukraine and Syria, all of 
which demanded the attention of our 
most experienced staff, made it hard 
to ensure that Ebola was given the 
attention and human resources it 
required, particularly in the first five 
months of the outbreak.
 ∙The duty of care to employees. Even 
within MSF, an organisation with a 
higher tolerance of risk than many 
other aid agencies, Ebola was consid-
ered especially hazardous. The lack 
of treatments available to infected 
staff and the high mortality rate cre-
ated an unparalleled fear among staff. 
Medical evacuations for international 
staff could not be guaranteed by their 
respective governments, and staff 
volunteering to go to west Africa had 
to accept that they might fall sick 
and be unable to return home. In 
addition, the fear of staff infections 
meant that MSF insisted on the 
most stringent safety protocols – for 
example limiting the time permitted 
in the high-risk zone – thus reduc-
ing the freedom of medical staff to 
determine and provide the quality of 
care for patients that they would have 
wanted. This caused much anguish 
amongst MSF medical staff.  
 ∙Mobilising the full force of capacity 
within the wider MSF network. Over 
the years, MSF’s experience with 
viral haemorrhagic fevers had been 
largely centralised within a group 
of experts and it was considered 
a specialism. Among the parts of 
MSF with less Ebola experience, 
there was a reluctance to intervene 
immediately. MSF should have been 
faster at mobilising the full capacity 
of the organisation to respond to the 
outbreak. 
 ∙Patients or public health? There 
was an impossible tension between 
curbing the spread of the disease, 
and providing the best clinical care to 
each patient. This became particu-
larly acute in August and September 
in Liberia when case numbers 
spiked and our facilities became 
overwhelmed. At times we were only 
providing the most basic palliative 
care to patients and prioritising the 
admission of people who were highly 
infectious in order to reduce the 
spread of Ebola in the community. We 
deliberately increased the number 
of beds, acknowledging that this 
would necessitate a drop in the level 
of care – for many an unbearable 
compromise.
 ∙Staff turnover. Ebola outbreaks 
consume a huge amount of resourc-
es, particularly staff. The duration 
of frontline field assignments for 
international staff during the Ebola 
outbreak was much shorter than 
usual – a maximum of a few weeks 
rather than months. This was to 
ensure that they remained alert and 
did not become too exhausted or 
complacent. However an unintended 
consequence of this turnover was 
that details were not always handed 
over; lessons had to be learned, then 
learned again.
 ∙Adapting our response. Given that 
our resources were overstretched, 
could we have adapted our strategy 
in deciding what to focus on in each 
location, or did we go into reactive, 
damage control mode? For example, 
how could we have done more to 
address the deep public mistrust in 
Guinea? And could we have pushed 
more forcefully in Sierra Leone at the 
beginning? 
 ∙Diverted priorities. At times it felt 
as if we were trying to do everything 
everywhere. Difficulties in organising 
efficient medical evacuation arrange-
ments, fighting travel bans imposed 
without scientific evidence, helping 
to convince airlines such as Brussels 
Airlines to continue flights to the 
region, training other organisations, 
and managing fear and often hysteri-
cal public opinion in ‘home’ societies 
all diverted attention away from the 
critical needs in the field.

|20
Despite more than 40 years of working in some of the world’s worst humanitar-
ian crises, this Ebola outbreak has wrought an exceptionally heavy toll on MSF’s 
staff, and particularly on our west African colleagues. Not since the early days 
of HIV care have MSF staff sustained the loss of so many patients dying in our 
facilities, without the tools to save them – and never in such an intense short 
period of time, with death fast-forwarding from 10 years to 10 days.
Although many unknowns remain about 
the virus, MSF has learned much over 
the past year, from improving the design 
of Ebola management centres to devel-
oping protocols for the care of pregnant 
women and children. Before this out-
break, Ebola was thought to be a death 
sentence for pregnant women, while 
now specialised care has seen women 
emerging 
Ebola-free 
from 
MSF’s 
centres. 
Over the past year, MSF teams have had 
to make difficult choices in the face of 
competing priorities and in the absence 
of available treatment and enough 
resources. As in all MSF programmes, 
there have been operational and med-
ical challenges, successes and failures, 
which are being evaluated in full. MSF 
already considers, as an initial lesson, 
that we should have mobilised more 
human resources earlier across the 
entire movement. 
Still not over
In early 2015, cases were still on the 
decline, causing some speculation 
about the end of the epidemic. Liberia 
is currently on the countdown to zero 
cases, with no new cases presenting 
since early March. However the overall 
number of cases in the region is still 
fluctuating and has not significantly 
declined since late January. 
With more organisations on the ground 
and enough beds for Ebola patients, 
MSF teams continue running centres 
and are able to focus on filling gaps in 
outreach activities such as surveillance, 
contact-tracing and social mobilisation. 
Ebola is not over until there are zero 
cases in the region for a period of 42 
days. Perseverance and tenacity are 
mandatory for the medical teams, while 
gaining the trust and positive collab-
oration of the affected communities. 
Looking to the future
Sierra Leone. Piloting began in January 
for a new electronic, tablet-based patient 
data management system in MSF’s Ebola 
treatment centres in Sierra Leone. The 
specially developed hardware is easy for 
glove-wearing, time-pressed medics to use. 
The tablet allows staff to access a patient’s 
history and collect more complete health 
data – such as pulse and respiration rates 
– to better track a patient’s progress and 
provide them with individually tailored care. 
© Ivan Gayton/MSF

21|
Meanwhile a practical plan to sustain 
research and development for vac-
cines, treatments and diagnostic tools 
must be developed. These will be key 
in protecting the region from current or 
future resurgences of similar outbreaks.
Rebooting health services in 
Guinea, Sierra Leone and Liberia
The trauma of Ebola has left people 
distrustful of health facilities, has left 
health workers demoralised and fearful 
of resuming services, and has left com-
munities bereaved, impoverished and 
suspicious.
Nearly 500 healthcare workers have lost 
their lives in this epidemic, a disastrous 
blow to an already serious shortfall of 
staff in the three countries before the 
Ebola crisis hit. 
The basic relaunching of health services 
is urgent. Children have missed vac-
cinations, HIV patients have had their 
treatment interrupted and pregnant 
women need a safe place to deliver their 
babies. 
However, restoring healthcare systems 
to pre-Ebola levels without addressing 
the underlying flaws and weaknesses is 
not enough. Improving access to health-
care, and improving the quality of ser-
vices on offer, will be necessary to allow 
early detection of any future outbreaks 
of Ebola and other infectious diseases, 
as well as a more effective response. 
It is unreasonable to expect different 
results when applying similar strate-
gies and approaches. 
The risk that lessons won’t be 
learnt
After every large-scale humanitarian 
emergency, there is the hope that les-
sons from it will be learned. However, 
this feel-good rhetoric is often not 
enough. 
“For 
months, 
ill-equipped 
national 
health authorities and volunteers from 
a few private aid organisations bore the 
brunt of care in this epidemic. There is 
something profoundly wrong with that,” 
says Dr Liu.
Health authorities in Guinea, Liberia 
and Sierra Leone now possess the kno-
whow to detect, investigate and tackle 
Ebola, while laboratories are in place 
in the capitals. But beyond having the 
means, political will is crucial to put this 
knowledge into practice.
More aid organisations have now been 
trained on Ebola management by MSF, 
the WHO and CDC. The knowledge has 
been shared, but it risks being of little 
use if it is not immediately deployed at 
the onset of another epidemic. 
“The flexibility and agility for a fast, 
hands-on emergency response still 
does not sufficiently exist in the global 
health and aid systems,” says Dr Liu. 
“Lessons that should have been learned 
in the mass cholera epidemic in Haiti 
four years ago were not.”
Though the WHO Executive Board has 
passed a resolution to enact reforms 
for epidemic response and address 
internal incoherence, it seems unlikely 
that radical reform will happen over-
night. Realistically, few member states 
have any interest in empowering an 
outside international body to respond 
to epidemics in their territories. How-
ever, it is clear that member states 
must engage more swiftly and strongly 
to support those countries that lack the 
capacity to respond to infectious dis-
ease outbreaks.
But let us avoid jumping to convenient 
conclusions. It would be a mistake to 
attribute full responsibility for the dys-
functional response to just one agency. 
Instead, the age-old failures of the 
humanitarian aid system have also been 
laid bare for the world to see, rather 
than buried in underreported crises like 
those in Central African Republic and 
South Sudan.
Global failures have been brutally 
exposed in this epidemic and thousands 
of people have paid for it with their lives. 
The world is more interconnected today 
than ever before and world leaders 
cannot turn their backs on health crises 
in the hope that they remain confined 
to poor countries far away. It is to eve-
ryone’s benefit that lessons be learned 
from this outbreak, from the weakness 
of health systems in developing coun-
tries, to the paralysis and sluggishness 
of international aid. 
“The Ebola outbreak has been often 
described as a perfect storm: a cross-
border epidemic in countries with 
weak public health systems that had 
never seen Ebola before,” says Chris-
topher Stokes. “Yet this is too con-
venient an explanation. For the Ebola 
outbreak to spiral this far out of con-
trol required many institutions to fail. 
And they did, with tragic and avoidable 
consequences.” 

Map of the region
CONAKRY •
 • FORÉCARIAH
MAGBURAKA •
FREETOWN  •
MONROVIA  •
KAILAHUN •
 • FARANAH
 • KAMBIA
 • BO
 • FOYA
 • BOMI
 • QUEWEIN
 • GRAND CAPE MOUNT
 • TÉLIMÉLÉ
• KISSIDOUGOU
• RIVER CESS
• KÉROUANÉ
• DABOLA
 • BOFFA
 • GUÉCKÉDOU
• MACENTA
• KANKAN
GUINEA
SIERRA
LEONE
LIBERIA
Ebola management centre
LEGEND
Activities set up and run by MSF 
over the course of the last year:
Transit centre
Training facility
Clinical trial site
Rapid response team
www.msf.org
