 
 
 
 
UNMEER│unmeersitreps@un.org 
 
 
 
UN Mission for Ebola Emergency Response (UNMEER) 
External Situation Report 
5 March 2015 
KEY POINTS 
 
Liberia reports no new EVD case in a week 
 
Response partners in Sierra Leone support district level initiative 
 
WFP continues to leverage to support response efforts 
 
Key Political and Economic Developments 
1. NSTR 
Response Efforts and Health 
2. In total, 23,934 confirmed, probable, and suspected cases of EVD have been reported in the three most 
affected countries. There have been reported 9,792 deaths. 
3. WHO reported a total of 132 new confirmed cases of EVD in the week to 1 March, an increase from 99 
cases reported in the week to 22 February. Liberia reported no new confirmed cases this week, the first 
time since the week of 26 May 2014.   In the week to 1 March, of 45 samples tested for EVD nationwide, 
none were positive.  Contacts from the last known chain of transmission, in the St Paul’s Bridge district 
of Monrovia are being monitored.  Guinea reported 51 new confirmed cases in the week to 1 March, 
compared to 35 cases in the previous week, with marked increase in case incidence in Forecariah (17) 
and Conakry (23) compared with the previous week. Macenta reported 2 new confirmed cases, a district 
that has not reported a confirmed case for 4 weeks. Low levels of transmission continue in the eastern 
prefecture of Lola (1 new case), bordering Côte d’Ivoire.  Sierra Leone reported 81 new confirmed cases 
from 8 districts in the week to 1 March, compared to 63 in the previous week.   Bombali reported 22 
new confirmed cases. There were 26 new confirmed cases in Freetown and 16 new cases in Port Loko 
over the same period.  
4. On 3 March in Sierra Leone, UNMEER and partners provided support to the Western Area District 
Health Management Team (DHMT) to conduct a planning workshop for all partners engaged in EVD 
response under the social mobilization pillar.   Participants assessed current program approach in the 
Western Area, and agreed as well to develop plans with clear operational procedures to improve 
coordination within the pillar, including integrating surveillance, contact tracing, quarantine, and burial 
activities.  
5. WHO, UNFPA and the MOH in Sierra Leone conducted field visits in 14 districts as part of efforts to 
implement the enhanced approach to contact tracing. The joint teams are focusing on providing 
technical guidance to the districts about selection of contact tracers, discussing new roles of the 
enhanced tracers/supervisors after reaching zero cases of EVD, and getting DERC and the District 
Health Management Teams’ (DHMT) support to implement the new policy. 
6. In Liberia, UNDP, together with UNMEER and the Ministry of Health and Social Welfare, have set up a 
public website providing a comprehensive package of information regarding payments to Ebola 
Response Workers. The site provides real-time data, using online maps with payment modalities and 
details. The website can be found at http://ebolapayments.org.The Programme of Payments for the 
Ebola Response Workers is led by UNDP, in partnership with UNMEER and technical experts from the 
United Nations Capital Development Fund (UNCDF). 
Logistics 
7. In Liberia, UNMEER , WHO and the CHT of Grand Kru County met with the logistics team from WHO-
Monrovia on streamlining the access to IPC materials from the Field Logistic Base (FLB) in Harper 
and their distribution by John Snow International (JSI) to the health facilities across the country. 
8. On 27 February, the Prime Minister of Senegal officially inaugurated the Humanitarian Terminal 
(Terminal H) in Dakar. Terminal H provides medical screening services, facilitating the entrance and 

 
 
 
 
 
 
UNMEER│unmeersitreps@un.org 
 
exit of humanitarian personnel travelling from and to the Ebola-affected countries on UNHAS/UNMEER 
flights. Located on "Ouakam Air Force Base" at Dakar Leopold Sedar Senghor International airport, this 
Terminal is the base of UNHAS/UNMEER air operations in Senegal.  
9. The WFP-led Emergency Telecoms (ET) Cluster is providing Internet connectivity in 84 locations across 
the three affected countries, ensuring reliable Internet access for 2,163 humanitarian personnel. Last 
week in Sierra Leone, in partnership with emergency.lu, the ET Cluster upgraded equipment at 
International 
Humanitarian 
Partnership 
(IHP) 
camps 
in 
Port 
Loko 
and 
Moyamba 
improving connectivity for the humanitarian community operating in the area.  
10. For regular logistics operational information please visit http://www.logcluster.org/ops/ebola14. 
Resource Mobilisation 
11. The OCHA Ebola Virus Outbreak Overview of Needs and Requirements, now totaling USD 2.27 billion, 
has been funded for USD 1.3 billion, which is around 57% of the total ask.  
12. The Ebola Response Multi-Partner Trust Fund currently has USD 136.8 million in commitments. In total 
USD 140 million has been pledged. 
13. All humanitarian partners, including donors and recipient agencies, are encouraged to inform OCHA's 
Financial Tracking Service (http://fts.unocha.org) of their contributions via the e-mail address: 
fts@un.org. 
Outreach and Education 
14. In Guinea, as part of continuing efforts to calibrate community engagement, the Ministry of Youth and 
Sport in partnership with UNICEF led an EVD sensitization mission in Labe.  The mission, comprised 
of six famous Guinean players from the 1970s and Miss Guinea 2014, launched the "0 Ebola in 60 
days" Caravane.  The Ministry of Communications began an EVD sensitization campaign for the staff 
of Forécariah Prefecture and its sub-Prefectures.  The Ministry also delivered EVD sensitization 
messages in 9 sub-Prefectures of Kankan.  
15. In Sierra Leone, the Moyamba DERC commenced the conduct of a monitoring and sensitization tour in 
all chiefdoms as a prelude to inviting all Paramount Chiefs and sub chiefs, Women’s Leaders and 
groups, Youths, Religious leaders and Community Health worker to a District meeting to review issue 
critical to the “Getting to Zero” drive. Community stakeholders re-iterated their commitment to support 
response efforts. 
Essential Services 
16. A social mobilization committee meeting was convened at the County Health Office in Buchanan, Grand 
Bassa County, Liberia. The National Red Cross Society and IOM agreed to support 15 weekly airtime 
programmes at various local stations to augment the efforts of the committee. The members of the 
Media and Messaging committee informed that logistics and mobility continue to be major challenges 
in rolling out their campaigns.  The Bassa Women Development Association (BAWODA) announced 
that that they are funded by the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency (SIDA) to 
provide psychosocial training for Ebola survivors.  
17. In Liberia, UNMEER and WHO joined the County Health Officer (CHO) of Bong County to discuss the 
formal positioning of general community volunteers (gCHVs) at the border points. It was agreed that 
nine trained gCHVs each will be stationed at Gbaota (borders Guinea) and Garmu (a check point 
strategically located in Pantakpai district) from 5 March. 
18. UNMEER along with the county health team (CHT) and UNFPA visited Ganta border post, Nimba 
County to carry out an assessment of sanitation and health issues. The team established that both 
border posts were closed on the Guinean side. Border officials reported that the CDC and WHO carried 
out an assessment of the WASH needs in February and planned to provide assistance.  
19. In Sierra Leone, World Vision conducted a one-day workshop for 40 youths in Tonkolili District on 
Psycho-social First Aid. The need for expanded training in this pillar is a response to the growing 
importance of counselling services for EVD survivors, school officers, traumatized communities, 
children and other affected groups. 
Upcoming Events 
20. NSTR 
Attachments and resources 
21. Reliefweb: Maps on the EVD response. 
